Exercise: Getting Started with FastAPI

Part 1: Understanding FastAPI Fundamentals

FastAPI is a modern Python web framework used to build APIs quickly and efficiently. It is designed around Python type hints and automatically generates API documentation.

Comparison with Flask:
a. Flask is lightweight and requires additional libraries for validation and documentation.
b. FastAPI provides validation and documentation out of the box.

Comparison with Django:
a. Django is a full-stack framework with built-in ORM, authentication, and admin features.
b. FastAPI focuses specifically on API development and offers better performance for API services.

Key advantages of FastAPI:
a. Automatic API documentation.
b. Built-in request validation using Pydantic.
c. High performance.
d. Easy to learn and use.
e. Strong support for asynchronous programming.

Key concepts learned:
a. FastAPI Application
b. Routes
c. Path Parameters
d. Query Parameters
e. Pydantic Models
f. Request Validation
g. Dependency Injection
h. Automatic Documentation

Part 2: Creating My First API

I created a simple FastAPI application with the following endpoints:

a. GET /
Returns a welcome message.

b. GET /items/{item_id}
Returns information about a specific item.

c. GET /search/
Demonstrates the use of query parameters.

To run the application:

Install dependencies:

pip install fastapi uvicorn

Start the server:

uvicorn main:app --reload

Open the browser:

http://127.0.0.1:8000/docs

The automatic Swagger documentation made it easy to test endpoints without using external tools.

Part 3: Enhancing the API

Additional FastAPI concepts learned:

a. Pydantic Models
Used for request and response validation.

b. Custom Exception Handling
Used to return meaningful error messages.

c. APIRouter
Helps organize routes into separate files.

d. Response Models
Ensures consistent API responses.

e. Query Validation
Prevents invalid input from reaching the application.

Benefits of structuring the application into multiple files:

a. Better maintainability.
b. Easier debugging.
c. Improved scalability.
d. Clear separation of concerns.

Part 4: To-Do API Challenge

Features implemented:

a. Create a to-do item.
b. List all to-do items.
c. Filter by completed or pending status.
d. Mark a to-do item as completed.
e. Delete a to-do item.

Validation implemented:

a. Required title field.
b. Due date validation.
c. Error handling for missing items.

API documentation was automatically generated through FastAPI's Swagger UI.

Key Learnings

FastAPI provides automatic request validation through Pydantic, reducing the amount of manual validation code required.
FastAPI automatically generates interactive API documentation, making testing and development much faster.
Organizing routes, models, and exception handlers into separate modules improves maintainability and follows industry best practices.